Add EtcdBackup CRD enhancement for OADP integration (#1945)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/hypershift/hcp-etcd-backup-crd-for-oadp-integration.md

    // Required when storageType is "AzureBlob".
    // +optional
    AzureBlob *EtcdBackupAzureBlob `json:"azureBlob,omitempty"`
}

// EtcdBackupStorageType identifies the cloud storage backend.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=S3;AzureBlob
type EtcdBackupStorageType string

const (
    S3BackupStorage        EtcdBackupStorageType = "S3"
    AzureBlobBackupStorage EtcdBackupStorageType = "AzureBlob"
)

// EtcdBackupS3 defines S3-specific upload configuration.
type EtcdBackupS3 struct {
    // bucket is the S3 bucket name.
    // +required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    Bucket string `json:"bucket"`

    // region is the AWS region of the bucket.
    // +required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    Region string `json:"region"`

    // keyPrefix is the S3 key prefix for the backup file.
    // +required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    KeyPrefix string `json:"keyPrefix"`

    // credentialsSecretRef references a Secret containing AWS credentials
    // for uploading to S3. The Secret must exist in the Hypershift Operator
    // namespace and contain a 'credentials' key with a valid AWS credentials file.
    // +required

>     CredentialsSecretRef corev1.LocalObjectReference `json:"credentialsSecretRef"`

Author: Understood — no commitment to encryption scopes with CMK for ARO-HCP at this point. The API field (`encryptionKeyURL`) exists but the implementation is pending your team's decision on the mechanism.

The architecture is ready to support whichever approach ARO chooses (encryption scopes, account-level CMK, or client-side encryption) with localized changes to the Azure uploader. We'll coordinate once ARO has a defined approach.

>     CredentialsSecretRef corev1.LocalObjectReference `json:"credentialsSecretRef"`

Author: The `credentialsSecretRef` references a Secret in the HO namespace that is **shared** — it is a copy of the Velero `BackupStorageLocation` (BSL) credential, extracted from the OADP/Velero namespace by the plugin during backup. The same BSL credential is used for all HCPs that back up to the same storage location.

The flow is: the OADP plugin reads the BSL credential (either from `bsl.spec.credential` or falling back to the `cloud-credentials` Secret in the Velero namespace), copies it to the HO namespace, and sets the `credentialsSecretRef` on the `HCPEtcdBackup` CR pointing to that copy. This means the credential is not per-HCP — it's per-BSL, which in practice maps to a single shared credential for all hosted clusters on the management cluster.

The controller then auto-detects the credential type (static, STS/IRSA, Workload Identity) from the Secret content and configures the backup Job accordingly. See the [Credential Auto-Detection](#credential-auto-detection) section.

#### Etcd Health Pre-Checks

Before creating the backup Job, the controller performs pre-checks on the etcd cluster health to avoid taking a snapshot of an unhealthy cluster. This includes verifying endpoint availability and quorum status. If the etcd cluster is unhealthy, the controller sets `BackupCompleted=False` with reason `EtcdUnhealthy` and does not proceed with the Job creation.

#### Backup Retention

Backup retention is managed via TTL and count-based policies configured externally (e.g., through the HO CLI or Velero TTL). The `EtcdBackup` CRs are simple records — deleting a CR does **not** delete the corresponding cloud storage object.

This approach has several advantages:
- **PutObject-only permissions** — the backup Job's ServiceAccount only needs write access to cloud storage (`s3:PutObject` / Azure Blob write), not delete permissions. This reduces the blast radius of the credentials.
- **No finalizer complexity** — avoids issues with stuck CRs when cloud storage credentials are unavailable at deletion time.

> - **Decoupled lifecycle** — cloud storage object retention is managed by the storage backend's native lifecycle policies (S3 Lifecycle Rules, Azure Blob lifecycle management) or by the OADP/Velero TTL mechanism.

Author: Good recommendation grounded in real production experience. S3 object tagging for lifecycle rules is a valuable safety net, especially given the Velero deletion stuck scenarios you've described.

The architecture supports this — adding tags to the S3 PutObject call in the `etcd-upload` subcommand is a localized change (a new flag + `Tagging` parameter on the upload request). The old `etcd-backup` binary actually had tagging support (`--s3-object-tags` flag), so we have a reference implementation.

We'll track this as a follow-up improvement. The approach would be either a dedicated field in the `HCPEtcdBackup` spec for custom tags, or extracting tags from the BSL configuration (as you suggested with `BSL.spec.config.tagging`).

## Motivation

### User Stories

- As an **SRE**, I want to trigger an etcd backup of a hosted cluster so that I can restore it in a disaster recovery scenario.
- As the **OADP plugin**, I want a Kubernetes-native API to request etcd backups and discover the resulting backup URL so that I can integrate etcd snapshots into the standard OADP backup flow.
- As a **platform operator**, I want management-level cloud credentials (S3 access) to remain isolated in the HO namespace so that customer-scoped HCP namespaces are not exposed to service-level credentials.

### Goals

1. Define a CRD that acts as a declarative API for requesting etcd backups.
2. Implement a controller in the HO that orchestrates the backup lifecycle (snapshot + upload).
3. Keep all backup workloads and management credentials in the HO namespace.
4. Report backup status and the resulting snapshot URL through the CR status for OADP consumption.

### Non-Goals

1. Scheduled/periodic backups — this enhancement covers on-demand backups only. Scheduling is an OADP concern.

> 2. Backup restore — restore is handled by the existing `RestoreSnapshotURL` mechanism in the HCP spec.

Author: Yes, the OADP plugin orchestrates the `RestoreSnapshotURL` usage during restoration. The flow is:

1. During backup, the plugin stores the `snapshotURL` from the `HCPEtcdBackup` CR status as an annotation on the HostedControlPlane/HostedCluster objects in the Velero tarball.
2. During restore, the plugin's `RestoreItemAction` reads the annotation, generates a presigned URL (S3 presigned GET or Azure Blob SAS), and injects it into `spec.etcd.managed.storage.restoreSnapshotURL`.
3. The existing HyperShift restore machinery picks up the URL and restores etcd from the snapshot.

This is implemented in openshift/hypershift-oadp-plugin#247.

3. Storage backends beyond AWS S3 and Azure Blob Storage — the storage backend is designed to be agnostic via an uploader interface that will be implemented as part of this work. The initial implementation will support S3, and Azure Blob Storage will be added subsequently within this same epic. Additional backends can be added later by implementing the same interface.

> 4. OADP plugin implementation — the CRD is the contract; the plugin is out of scope. The OADP HyperShift plugin will invoke this CRD as a step within the Velero backup workflow to trigger the etcd snapshot and upload before proceeding with the standard resource backup.

Author: Yes — CNTRLPLANE-2676 encompasses all the plugin work. The OADP HyperShift plugin implementation is in openshift/hypershift-oadp-plugin#247, which integrates the HCPEtcdBackup CR lifecycle (create, poll, cleanup) and handles the restore flow (presigned URLs for RestoreSnapshotURL injection).

Regarding "Minimize Pause Duration" from OCPSTRAT-2802: this enhancement **is** the solution. The previous backup approach required pausing HostedCluster/NodePool reconciliation during CSI volume snapshots (20-30 min per cycle). With HCPEtcdBackup, the backup Job runs independently without pausing reconciliation. Future considerations around pausing during restore (CAPI node re-adoption) are out of scope and will be addressed separately.

4. Report backup status and the resulting snapshot URL through the CR status for OADP consumption.
5. Support optional per-tenant KMS encryption of backup artifacts in cloud storage via keys defined at the HostedCluster level.

### Non-Goals

1. Scheduled/periodic backups — this enhancement covers on-demand backups only. Scheduling is an OADP concern.
2. Backup restore — restore is handled by the existing `RestoreSnapshotURL` mechanism in the HCP spec.
3. Storage backends beyond AWS S3 and Azure Blob Storage — the storage backend is designed to be agnostic via an uploader interface that will be implemented as part of this work. The initial implementation will support S3, and Azure Blob Storage will be added subsequently within this same epic. Additional backends can be added later by implementing the same interface.
4. OADP plugin implementation — the CRD is the contract; the plugin is out of scope. The OADP HyperShift plugin will invoke this CRD as a step within the Velero backup workflow to trigger the etcd snapshot and upload before proceeding with the standard resource backup.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

> 1. The OADP plugin (running as a Velero pre-hook or standalone pod) creates an `HCPEtcdBackup` CR in the HCP namespace. The CR spec includes the cloud storage configuration (e.g., S3 bucket or Azure Blob container) and a reference to a credentials Secret in the HO namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The HyperShift OADP plugin (running as a Velero BackupItemAction) creates an `HCPEtcdBackup` CR in the HCP namespace. The CR spec includes the cloud storage configuration (e.g., S3 bucket or Azure Blob container) and a reference to a credentials Secret in the HO namespace.
```

Author: Acknowledged — will update the PR title and rename the enhancement file to reflect `HCPEtcdBackup`. This aligns with the CRD rename that's already landed in the implementation.

   - Validates that a `HostedControlPlane` exists in the same namespace.
   - Ensures no other backup Job is currently in progress for this HCP (only one backup at a time is allowed).
   - Performs pre-checks on etcd cluster health before proceeding (e.g., verifying quorum and endpoint availability).
   - Creates a temporary NetworkPolicy in the HCP namespace to allow ingress from the HO namespace to etcd pods on port 2379.
   - Creates a `Job` in the HO namespace using a ServiceAccount with access to cloud storage credentials (see [Service Account for Backup Jobs](#service-account-for-backup-jobs)). The Job uses a multi-step pattern (see [Container Image Strategy](#container-image-strategy)):
     - **InitContainer 1** (CPO image): fetches the etcd TLS certificates (`etcd-client-tls`, `etcd-ca`) from the HCP namespace and writes them to a shared `emptyDir` volume.
     - **InitContainer 2** (etcd image from the OCP release payload): runs `etcdctl snapshot save` using the TLS certificates from the shared volume, connecting to `etcd-client.<hcp-namespace>.svc.cluster.local:2379`. Writes the snapshot to a second shared `emptyDir` volume.

>      - **Main container** (CPO image): reads the snapshot file and uploads it to the configured cloud storage backend using `control-plane-operator etcd-upload`. If a KMS key is configured in the `HCPEtcdBackup` CR spec, the upload uses SSE-KMS (S3) or CMK (Azure) encryption.

Reviewer: from ai assisted research of relevant PRs this change intends to write to `{bsl-prefix}/backups/{name}/etcd-backup/12345.db`
which is the path used by velero/oadp to store backups. Keep in mind that velero have not documented officially that writing file here is supported usecase, and future velero versions can implicitly break this, tho (as a velero maintainer) I can try vouch to prevent that.

Currently also relies on velero maintaining following delete dir logic (ListObjects as a bonus captures ../etcd-backup/...)
```go
  DeleteBackup Logic (object_store.go:499-516)                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                     
  func (s *objectBackupStore) DeleteBackup(name string) error {                                                                                                      
      objects, err := s.objectStore.ListObjects(s.bucket, s.layout.getBackupDir(name))
      // ...
      for _, key := range objects {                                                                                                                                  
          s.objectStore.DeleteObject(s.bucket, key)
      }                                                                                                                                                              
  }
```

Should this change, deletion would be another risk area.

Another consideration is future implementation of velero support for object lock enabled buckets
https://github.com/velero-io/velero/issues/8686 we have not nailed down the design there yet. But I would assume that any unexpected writes in /backups/ could interfere potentially this area.

Author: Good concern. The path construction is handled entirely by the OADP plugin — the HCPEtcdBackup controller is agnostic to the key structure and just uses whatever `keyPrefix` is provided in the CR spec.

The plugin currently constructs the key as `{bsl-prefix}/backups/{backup-name}/etcd-backup/{timestamp}.db`, which places the snapshot inside Velero's backup directory. This gives us cascading deletion (Velero's `DeleteBackup` does `ListObjects` on the backup directory and removes everything, including our subdirectory) and natural correlation between the Velero resource backup and the etcd snapshot.

The trade-off is the dependency on Velero's directory layout. If this is a concern, the plugin can be updated to use a separate path outside `/backups/` — that change would be isolated to the plugin with no impact on the controller or CRD.

For now, given your offer to help prevent breaking changes upstream, we think the current approach is the pragmatic choice. We'll document this dependency in the enhancement.

Reviewer: We can also code it into velero requirements so it doesn't change in the future etc. If you think that fits better, please create issue in velero repo

Reviewer: Created issue and got feedback here.. https://github.com/velero-io/velero/issues/9837#issuecomment-4513895942 Please review their concern and let me know how you would like to proceed.

Reviewer: Given Lyndon's feedback that the object store layout should remain private with no compatibility guarantee, one pattern to consider is what the [kubevirt-datamover-controller](https://github.com/migtools/kubevirt-datamover-controller) does — it uses a **separate sibling prefix** instead of writing inside Velero's `backups/` directory:

```
# Current (inside Velero's tree):
{bsl-prefix}/backups/{backup-name}/etcd-backup/snapshot.db

# Kubevirt datamover pattern (separate sibling prefix):
{bsl-prefix}-kubevirt-datamover/checkpoints/{ns}/{vm}/...
{bsl-prefix}-kubevirt-datamover/manifests/{backup}/...
```

For HyperShift etcd backups, this could look like:

```
{bsl-prefix}-hypershift-etcd/{backup-name}/{timestamp}.db
```

The key construction in the plugin ([`orchestrator.go` L207-210](https://github.com/openshift/hypershift-oadp-plugin/blob/main/pkg/etcdbackup/orchestrator.go#L207-L210)) would change from:

```go
keyPrefix := fmt.Sprintf("backups/%s/etcd-backup", backupName)
```

to something like:

```go
keyPrefix := fmt.Sprintf("%s-hypershift-etcd/%s", bslPrefix, backupName)
```

Since jparrill confirmed the HCPEtcdBackup controller is storage-agnostic (just uses whatever `keyPrefix` the plugin provides), this is a plugin-only change.

**Trade-off:** You lose Velero's free cascading deletion via `ListObjects` on the backup prefix. You'd need either:
1. A **DeleteItemAction (DIA)** plugin to clean up the etcd snapshot when a Velero backup is deleted, or
2. **S3 lifecycle rules** with object tagging (which the team already discussed as a safety net), or
3. Reference tracking similar to what kubevirt-datamover does with `referencedBy` in its `index.json`

This aligns with Lyndon's recommended architecture: use BIA/RIA/DIA interfaces, manage your own data lifecycle, don't depend on Velero's internal directory layout.

> [!Note]
> Responses generated with Claude
